  Design of a Qi Wireless Charging Device
  A Guide to Engineering Considerations

   The Qi (pronounced Chee) wireless power transfer standard, based on the Wireless Power
   Consortium (WPC) Power Class 0 specification, has become the international wireless
   charging standard for consumer electronics devices. This specification defines two discrete
   power levels: the 5W (Baseline Power Profile) and the 15W (Extended Power Profile) which
   allows charging devices to easily adapt to changing power levels. This is important to
   ensure compatibility with different types of consumer electronics devices, such as smart-
   phones and tablets.




  This white paper is intended to provide design engineers with a com-
  prehensive overview of the major components required to incorporate Qi
  wireless charging into consumer electronics products.



   Qi Wireless Design Overview:
   The principle of wireless power transfer in basic terms is an open-air transformer consist-
   ing of primary and secondary coils and associated electronics. The same concept applies;
   magnetic flux coupling occurs between the two coils which induces a voltage on the
   secondary coil.




                                                 Power


                 MOSFET
                                 Half/Full                        Rectiﬁcation                     LDO       Load
                  Driver
                                  Bridge                          Mod/Demod
   Tx
Controller

                                                 Data
                 Demod
                                                                   Qi packet
                                                 Data              Controller
                                                                                                 Voltage &
                                                                                                  Current
              Transmitter (TX)                                    PMA packet                      Sensing
                                                                   Controller

                                                                                 Receiver (RX)


                                        Figure 1: Qi Charger Power and Data Transfer Block Diagram (Rohm, 2015)



                                                        1
As shown in Figure 1, a Qi Charger design consists of two subsystems: Transmitter (Tx) and
the Receiver (Rx). The Tx subsystem is composed of integrated circuits (ICs) and a Tx coil
that are used to convert a DC low voltage (5 to 20VDC) power source to an AC high voltage
of 50 to 100VAC. This AC voltage is used to energize the Tx resonance tank circuit to create
a tuned magnetic field frequency in the range of 100KHz to 120KHz.

The Qi wireless receiver (Rx) subsystem is also composed of a specific set of ICs, along with
the Rx coil, that convert the magnetic field’s AC energy field back to DC power that can then
be used to charge a battery and/or provide power directly to the Receiver load. The Receiver
subsystem plays the most critical role in fine-tuning the power transfer efficiency which
requires a combination of series and parallel capacitors that, along with the Rx coil, create a
resonant LC tank circuit to match the Transmitter’s resonance frequency.




                                                  Figure 2: Inductive Resonance Circuit Tuning (Smith, 2017)



As shown in Figure 2, the Receiver includes a dual resonant circuit that consists of the
secondary coil LRX along with series CS and parallel Cd capacitances. The purpose of the
series resonant capacitor CS is to maximize power transfer efficiency. The parallel capacitor
Cd is used to enhance resonant detection. The mutual inductance Lm(k) (flux linkage
between the two coils) is dependent on the Tx and Rx coils’ electrical properties and on the
physical separation of the two coils (Smith, 2017). The Receiver’s rectification circuit
provides full-wave rectification of the AC waveform and an output smoothing function. The
output of the rectification circuit provides power to the load and to the communications
and control units which execute the power control algorithms.

The TX resonant network LTX and CP converts the AC square wave to a sinusoidal waveform
which allows the power FETS to operate in a soft switching mode as well as improves power
transfer efficiency and reduces EMI harmonic radiation.

Before the Tx charging device can begin power transfer, it outputs a ‘search’ pulse signal
(ping) of energy to determine if there is a Qi-compliant receiver device within close proximi-
ty (2 -> 6mm). Once it detects a receiver, the transmitter then provides a small amount of
power to the receiver so the receiver can communicate back to the transmitter its power
requirements. Once this handshake is complete, the transmitter starts sending the request-
ed power to the receiver. During power transfer, the receiver is continually communicating
with the receiver with power request updates. This process ensures that the receiver’s


                                              2
changing load requirements are supported with the correct amount of power required at
any point in time.

How Qi Wireless Power Transfer Works:
The basic physical principle supporting Qi wireless power transfer is called magnetic induc-
tion, where flux lines generated from a time-varying magnetic field (~120KHz) within the
Transmitter coil creates an electromotive force that produces a voltage across the terminals
of the Receiver coil located inside the portable device. Key to wireless power transfer is the
fact that a magnetic field can penetrate through any non-metallic, non-ferrous materials.
This allows for significant flexibility in the design of both the charger base and the portable
device.

As shown in Figure 1, Qi-based power transfer requires bidirectional communications
between the Transmitter and Receiver subsystems. In order to set up power transfer and
respond to changing load conditions, the transmitter and receiver execute a communication
protocol with each other (WPC, 2017). The Qi power transmitter uses a modulation scheme
called frequency shift keying (FSK) to provide communications for power transfer synchroni-
zation with the receiver. The receiver uses a different modulation scheme called amplitude
shift keying (ASK) to communicate power level requests back to the transmitter. The actual
wireless power transfer occurs when the alternating current in the transmitter coil induces an
AC voltage in the receiver coil by a process known as magnetic induction. The receiver
subsystem incorporates an AC-to-DC full bridge rectifier to create a DC voltage output, along
with a Qi packet controller for communications back to the transmitter.



                               START     RECEIVER IS FIRST                       CALIBRATION FAILURE OR
                 SELECTION               PLACED ON THE                           ERROR CONDITION
                     0                   BASE STATION



                            OBJECT
                                                              NEGOTIATION
                            DETECTED
                                                              FAILURE OR ERROR
    NO RESPONSE OR                                            CONDITION
    NO POWER
    NEEDED


                     PING                              NEGOTIATION                                   CALIBRATION
                       1                                    4                                             5
                                                                             NEGOTIATION
                                                                             SUCCESSFUL




                                       RENEGOTIATE DEFAULT                          Full-Bridge
                                       POWER CONTRACT                                                        CALIBRATION
                                       P > 5W                                                                SUCCESSFUL
    ERROR
                                       NEG = ONE
  CONDITION                                                                                                                        RENEGOTIATION
                   ID &                                                                                                                  6
              CONFIGURATION
                    2
                                                                                                                   RENEGOTIATION
                                                                                                                   REQUEST
                             NO NEGOTIATION REQUESTED: NEG = ZERO
                             (5W POWER RECEIVERS ONLY)
                                                                                                         POWER
                                                                                                        TRANSFER                       NEGOTIATION
                                                                                                           3                            COMPLETED
                                                                Half-Bridge



                     Load ≤5W                                                       POWER TRANSFER                  PI CONTROL
                                                                                    COMPLETE OR ERROR                   LOOP
                     0W < Load ≤ 15W                                                CONDITION




                                 Figure 3: Qi Tx-Rx Power Transfer and Communications State Machine (Microchip, 2017)


                                                                       3
The software state machine shown in Figure 3 shows seven distinct phases for communica-
tion and power transfer between the transmitter and receiver (ROHM, 2015).

1. Selection – the Transmitter monitors the charger dock surface for the placement or
   removal of an object. The Transmitter also may attempt to differentiate between a
   Receiver and a foreign object.
2. Ping – the Transmitter sends out a digital ping pulse and listens for a response to
   determine if a Receiver is within range. If the TX discovers an RX, it then proceeds to the
   identification and configuration phase.
3. ID and configuration – the Transmitter identifies the selected Receiver and obtains
   configuration information such as the maximum allowed power to be transferred. The
   Tx uses this information to create a Power Transfer Contract (PTC) that contains limits
   for several power transfer parameters.
4. Power Transfer – the Transmitter provides power to the Receiver, constantly adjusting its
   output based on control data from the Receiver. During this phase, the Transmitter
   constantly monitors the Receiver’s PTC parameters and will terminate power transfer if
   it detects any of the PTC limits have been violated. The Tx will also terminate power if
   the Rx Device is removed during the Power Transfer phase, causing a time-out in the
   communications from the Receiver.

The next three phases are only implemented during the 15W EPP charging mode. The
higher power requires a more precise adjustment of parameters, mainly due to calibrating
for potential Foreign Object Detection (FOD) power losses.
5. Negotiation (only for EPP mode) – The Receiver negotiates with the Transmitter to
     fine-tune thePTC, especially related to FOD parameters. To improve its initial assess-
     ment of whether foreign objects are present, the Transmitter compares the quality
     factor parameter reported by the Receiver with its own measurement.
6. Calibration (only for EPP mode) – This phase is used for the transmitter to improve its
     ability to detect foreign objects during the EPP power transfer phase.
7. Renegotiation (only for EPP mode) – the Receiver can make adjustments to the PTC if
     required.

If the portable device placed on the Qi charger contains a low power 5W BPP (Baseline
Power Profile) receiver, the Tx inverter will operate in half-bridge mode. If the portable
device incorporates a 15W EPP-compatible receiver, the charger will operate in full-bridge
inverter mode. The portable device’s receiver can also renegotiate (phase 6) for low-power
(5W or less) transfer, where the Tx inverter reverts back to half-bridge mode for increased
efficiency. If the portable device receiver is designed to be charged by a 15W EPP-compati-
ble charger, but is placed on a 5W BPP charger, the receiver will still charge but at a slower
rate. Conversely, if a 5W receiver is placed on a 15W charger, the receiver will communicate
to the charger to send no more than 5W of power.

Power Transfer Efficiency:

A Qi-based system is similar to a conventional transformer in that power is transferred
from a primary to a secondary coil, however a standard laminated steel core transformer


                                              4
                     has a much higher magnetic coupling factor and is therefore much more efficient.
                     The efficiency measurement of a Qi wireless charging system can be computed from a
                     simple efficiency formula; however, when the overall efficiency number is calculated, it’s
                     important to incorporate all aspects (Magnetics loss, TX loss, RX loss) of system level
                     power loss as shown in Figure 4. The transmitter-receiver system efficiency is defined as
                     the receiver output’s load power (POL) divided by the transmitter’s input power (Pin).

                     The following design considerations can affect power transfer and overall system
                     efficiency (Microchip Technology, 2017):

                         • Transmitter electronics
                         • Receiver electronics
                         • Tx and Rx coil geometries
                         • Distance between Tx-Rx coils
                         • Alignment of Tx-Rx coils
                         • Design of ferrite magnetic shielding
                         • Tx and Rx enclosure materials


                                           System Efficiency =                     SYSTEM = POL/PIN
                                                    Power Transmitter                            Power Receiver
                                                                             Mag Eff

                                 Pin                   TxEff                                        RxEff                    Pol




              100%

              90%
                         Magnetics Eff

              80%                                                               Tx Eff


              70%
                                                                                                    System Eff
Efficiency%




              60%                      Rx Eff


              50%


              40%


              30%


              20%
                     0        0.5               1          1.5          2          2.5       3          3.5       4        4.5        5
                                                                            Output Power (W)


                                                                            Figure 4: System Efficiency versus Power Output (Wilson, 2016)



                                                                               5
One of the most important parts of the system are the Tx and Rx coils. When selecting the
appropriate coil for a specific design there are several key electrical parameters to consider, in
addition to the mechanical dimensions, such as the coil’s inductance, Q-factor, rated current,
and DC resistance. Also, for maximum power efficiency, it’s important that the composition of
the Tx and Rx enclosure material separating the two coils be composed of only non-metallic
plastics, since any metalized plastic or ferrite materials will absorb energy from the Tx base.
The Tx and Rx coils can be modeled as a 2-coil transformer with an air core. An important
element of this air-core transformer is the ferrite material shielding that provides a magnetic
flux path, allowing the flux fields to be contained within the two cores. The ferrite thickness is
important because it both absorbs and directs the magnetic flux density while also preventing
flux leakage outside of the coil. Unlike a traditional transformer which uses a laminated steel
core and has a relatively high magnetic flux coupling factor (k = 0.95 to 0.99), the best-case
coupling factor for the air-core Tx-Rx transformer is k = 0.7 – this assumes ideal conditions of
the Tx-Rx resonant tank tuning, Tx-Rx coil geometries, Tx-Rx coil alignment, Tx-Rx coil separa-
tion, and design of the ferrite materials (Clark). A more typical coupling factor for Qi chargers
mated with smartphones is in the range of 0.3 to 0.5.

Both the Tx and Rx coils require a ferrite substrate with high magnetic permeability in order to
concentrate the magnetic flux behind the respective coil during operation. This increases
system efficiency while also shielding any external objects from stray magnetic fields.

Foreign Object Detection

In order to qualify for WPC Qi product safety certification, Foreign Object Detection (FOD)
must be made an integral part of designing a Qi power transfer system. The AC magnetic
energy field between the transmitter and the receiver coils induces eddy currents in electrically
conductive materials that are placed on or near the charging device surface (Kuyvenhoven,
2011). These eddy currents can cause a metal object (e.g., coins, paperclips, aluminum foil
wrappers, etc.) to rapidly heat up in a process known as parasitic heating. In order to prevent
the foreign object from heating up to unacceptably high temperatures that exceed ISO safety




                                                        Figure 5: Transmitter (left) and Receiver (right) Coils



                                                6
      standard levels, the charging device must be capable of detecting the presence of foreign
      objects and take appropriate action to shut down power transfer.

      There are basically two methods of incorporating FOD: Q-Factor method and the Power Loss
      Detection (PLD) method. The Q-Factor method is designed to detect a foreign object prior to
      the power transfer process and will not start the power transfer process if the foreign object is
      absorbing too much energy from the AC magnetic field. The Power Loss Detection method, on
      the other hand, is designed for object detection after the power transfer process has begun.
      Both these methods have advantages and disadvantages (Muratov, 2017). Since the Q-Factor
      method occurs before actual power transfer begins, it is independent of the power level and is
      therefore more precise and has better resolution. However, it provides no FOD protection after
      the power transfer process, so if the user accidentally puts a metal object close to the Tx
      charger surface after the charging process begins, the FOD circuit will not detect it. Also, the
      Q-Factor calibration tuning procedure is more complicated and prone to being overly sensitive
      to premature shutdown even if no foreign objects are detected.

      A FOD circuit that uses the Power Loss Detection method is always in an active state and can
      detect foreign metal objects, as long as the Qi charger is powered. It can detect foreign
      objects within a few seconds and once detected will immediately shutdown the power trans-
      fer. It also is less susceptible to variances in the design of Qi power receivers found in the wide
      variety of smartphones. The disadvantages of the Power Loss Detection method are its
      sensitivity to false triggers during Receiver load transients and the potential for foreign
      objects to slightly heat up prior to the charger’s shutdown response.




                                              PLoss            = PPT _ PPR



                            Cp                                                 Cs
                                                      Metal
                                                      Object
PIn                                                                                                            POut
                                                                              Cd      Rc
                          Lp                 Power                                                     C
                                                                             Ls




        Transmitted                                                   PPR            Receiver
           Power               PPT                                                    Power
                                         Communicate
               = P In _ PPTLoss                                              = POut + PPTLoss


                                                                Figure 6: FOD Power Loss Detection Method (WPC, 2017)


      The following steps are used for implementing the Power Loss Detection (Figure 6) algorithm:

      1. All power losses are accounted for on TX and RX sides by empirical measurements.


                                                          7
2. Received power is communicated back to the TX charger side in real time during the
   power transfer process.

3. The difference between the expected and actual TX power output is attributed to Foreign
   Object (FO) losses and is compared with the set maximum threshold.

4. The FO power loss is compared to the set power loss threshold. The Qi certification
   standard requires that the charging device terminate the power transfer if the FO loss
   exceeds the 5W BPP limit of 350mW or the 15W EPP limit of 750mW.

To implement the Foreign Object Detection (FOD) function, the transmitter and receiver have
to communicate with each other to determine if the transmitter is providing more power than
what the receiver is expecting (Wireless Power Consortium, 2017). For example, if the 350mW
threshold is exceeded for a 5W BPP device, then the transmitter will shut down power transfer.

Compliance Testing:

The WPC standard was developed to ensure cross-compatibility of compliant Qi transmitters
and receivers. The standard defines the physical parameters and the communications proto-
col. The WPC Qi specification (Version 1.2.3, 2017) includes compliance tests that are used to
qualify products to make sure they conform to the latest Qi technical spec and are therefore
compatible with other Qi products. The compliance documentation includes information
about the requirements for the test configuration, the test procedure, and the analysis of test
results.
Qi testing and certification is a two-step process (Wireless Power Consortium, 2017). The first
phase is compliance testing to ensure that the Transmitter and/or Receiver device is compli-
ant with the Qi design and performance specification. Testing is conducted by a WPC autho-
rized ATL (Authorize Testing Laboratory) to ensure the device’s compliance with the Qi
specification. The second step is to conduct interoperability testing at a WPC authorized
interoperability center (IOC) where the product is tested to ensure compatibility with existing
registered Qi products.

To market a product as being Qi-certified, it must pass the full set of Qi compliance tests in
order to be registered by the WPC organization. The Qi logo is a registered WPC trademark
that can be displayed on products after successfully completing the Power Class 0 compliance
test and registration procedure.

Conclusion:

When starting a new design, it is important to first determine the Receiver’s maximum power
requirements, which can include both the battery charge time and the system’s fluctuating
power demands. Another important consideration is the design of the FOD circuit. Optimiza-
tion of the FOD sensitivity requires a balancing act and a significant amount of empirical
testing can sometimes be required to get the right balance for maximizing power transfer
without compromising FOD compliance. This is especially true for a 15W EPP Qi charger which
requires more careful analysis and testing than a 5W BPP design due to the inherent safety
issues of transferring at higher power levels.



                                               8
 The Wireless Power Consortium Power Class 0 specification is an excellent reference document
 for understanding the basics of designing a Qi-compatible charging dock and/or Qi-compati-
 ble Receiver embedded within a portable device. However, for a more detailed understanding
 of the design challenges, there are several Qi platform reference designs from vendors such as
 Rohm, IDT, Texas Instruments, and Microchip that provide evaluation boards and supporting
 documentation that explain specific component selection decisions and design tradeoffs.

 References:

 1. Clark, D., “Considerations When Designing a Wireless Charging System,” Abracon
 2. Kuyvenhoven, N., Dean, C., “Development of a Foreign Object Detection and Analysis
    Method for Wireless Power Systems,” 2011.
 3. Microchip Technology, “Microchip Wireless Power Development Board User’s Guide,” April
    2017.
 4. Muratov, V., “Methods for Foreign Object Detection in Inductive Wireless Charging,”
    November 16, 2017.
 5. ROHM BD57015GWL Wireless Power Receiver IC Datasheet, 2015.
 6. Smith, N., “White Paper – Tuning Qi and AirFuel/PMA Inductive Resonance Circuits for
    Optimal Efficiency,” May 10, 2017.
 7. Wilson, D., “IDT WPC1604 Qi Developer Forum Circuit Design Considerations,” August 24,
    2016.
 8. Wireless Power Consortium (WPC), “The Qi Wireless Power Transfer System – Power Class 0
    Specification,” Version 1.2.3, Parts 1, 2, 4,” February 2017




                   About the Author:                 About PCH
                   Jon Krakower                      Founded in 1996, PCH designs custom product
                                                     solutions for companies that are passionate
                                                     about design, brand and the consumer experi-
                                                     ence. We partner to bring world-class products
                                                     to global markets and we keep quality, sustain-
Jon has a thorough understanding of the product      ability, cost and time-to-market at the forefront
development process and specializes in hardware      of our solutions. PCH provides expert services all
design, system integration and high-volume           along the product journey from design engineer-
consumer electronics manufacturing.                  ing and development to manufacturing,
Jon received his BSEE and MSEE degrees from          personalization, fulfillment, and distribution.
Stanford University.                                 If it can be imagined, it can be made.




                             Please contact us: info@pchintl.com
